# The Week Before 

So here I am. After 11 years since I graduated from the University of Leicester with a BEng (Hons) in General Engineering, I'm back in the world of being a student. This time doing the User Experience (UX) Design MA at Falmouth University. To say I'm exicte would not be entirely accurate, I'm also quite nervous. It's been so long since I've studied, I do not know how hard this is going to be.

With that said, the main excitement comes from bettering the existing knowledge I already have. I've been adjacent to the world of UX for the better part of a decade, being a Technial Author/Writer. Though my current role involves a lot of UX-style work. I'm always engaging with co-workers, predominately in the Software Dev world, to find out what tooling/pipelines etc. could be used to better their development experience. I am in no way an expert when it comes to this, I'm just able to do a lot of research and take the time to design, develop and deploy tools for testing.

So with that in mind, and given this is going to be a learning diary to cover what is being covered in the module **Development Practice**, I'm going to use this to cover both my education and work lives.

What do I mean by that? Well, I'm going to use it to go over how I'm working on a project at work to research, design and deploy a new, internal wiki site. Which ties in well with incorporating how I'm using what I'm learning to better this process. Next up in this entry, some background information on my Internal Wiki Project.

## The Rework of the Company's Internal Wiki
 *I will add graphics when I get the time!*

 Some background on how this project came to exist. I was hired in September 2022 as the Technical Author in the Design Authority department. A really unique role. Not only do I get to write documentation, I get to design, define and research. You could say it's in the realm of Documentation Architecture, just without the job title. When I joined, my manager (who has the job title Design Authority) made it clear that I am the Documentation Authority. Anything and everything documentation related either goes through me or has my input. It's interesting and sometimes quite stressful.

With the role, comes a huge aspect of providing the best experience when it comes to documentation, both internal and external. As the company is quite young (it was founded in 2021), there isn't much being deployed externally. Though there is documentation to go with external-facing products, and has a fairly easy UX for now.

The internal engineering/software dev documentation is all over the place, and my aim is to bring it into one place that is easy to use, easy to access and easy to read. Engineering tried with developing an internal wiki site, but it's clunky and not used because (unsurprisingly) the engineers and developers do not like it. 

Which is where I come in.

### Where to Start

*"Where to start?"* is usually the hardest question to answer. When it came to the existing wiki, it was fairly easy:

Step 1. Talk to the developers/engineers, learn their pain points and what they'd like from an internal wiki.
Step 2. Analyse the existing tool, and become familiar with the pain points raised.
Step 3. Research the existing tool - how often are updates released for the tool, how active is development.

After Step 3. the question *"Can the existing tool be improved to better the UX?"*. Unfortunately for me, the answer was no. With that, let's dive into the current tool in use, the feedback I received and why the answer was **No**.

### Wiki.js, the Feedback and the Consequences

Given by the title of this section, the tool that was already in use is [wiki.js](https://js.wiki/). Considered one of the best wiki generators, I cannot disagree there. It is good... if it's implemented correctly, and you do not need a huge range of features. Wiki.js is quite deceptive when it comes to working with it. If an instance is already set up, most of the difficult parts go away. But the deployment that's used in the company is something that they like; in basic terms, instead of relying on a repository to hold the information, it's sent to a database, stored on an AWS VPC (Virtual Computer), and built/deployed that way.

The problems appear when you start looking at the front facing aspects. Or at least the way it has been implemented in the company (and I could go into the political side of things, but lets just say there is a reluctance to change how it's been set up). This is where the feedback comes into play.

One of the most expressed issues with the current wiki set up was the search functionality being poor. Having used the search functionality myself, it is difficult. That was because the company had decided to use the [PostgreSQL](https://docs.requarks.io/search/postgres) search functionality, because the documentation is being stored in a PosgrSQL database. Even the documentation states it's a *"good enough"* search solution. Personally, I think that's over selling how basic that type of search is. It is basic, can only return full matching searches (so partial searches aren't going to happen), and even then, you're lucky to have any results. Another reason it was chosen was because of the company security policy (we have to be self-hosted, no data can be stored on the cloud or managed by a company other than the one I work at). That in itself makes it very restrictive. Because of the security policy, it made the use of Algolia, AWS Cloudsearch, Azure Search and Elasticsearch impossible. Which is annoying, given they're all supported by wiki.js, and have better functionality. 

The second most expressed issue with wiki.js was the created and publishing of documentation. Wiki.js has an inbuilt editor, where you can write documentation. Because the company uses a PostgreSQL database to store the documentation, there is no repository (e.g. Git), where all the documentation is pushed to for publishing. Which is a big problem in the company, as there is a huge push (including from me) to estabish a doc-as-code mentality. Simply put, the documentation lives with the code it's about and can be published to wherever it needs to go. So to get around this problem, another member of the team I'm in created a tool known as *Scribe* to publish any code to the PostgreSQl database from any company repository. All the developers needed to do what make sure that the Scribe tool was inserted into the Git build pipelines, so the necessary metadata could be added.

So one problem solved, right? No. Developers don't use Scribe. Because the company development is fast and ever changing direction, Scribe can become "broken" at any time. Which means more time is spent of retroactively fixing Scribe. No amount of pushing Engineering/Development teams, giving them live and recorded tutorials is getting them to try and use Scribe. They want a tool that can just pull directly from their repositories, and they don't have to do or add anything else into product build pipelines.

That itself is a whole other can of worms. No amount of UX design, research, instructional training or documentation can make people use a tool they've already decided they do not like. And that is the consequence of not doing proper UX and architecture research before development and deployment. Wiki.js was implemented before I was hired, so it's not like I could've prevented any of this from happening.

From one consequence comes another... The consequence of not doing proper research has led to people not using the wiki at all for their documentation. So Scribe was created to help with that, and noone wants to use it because they do not like wiki.js. So here I am, effectively reinventing the wheel, because instead of just tweaking the wiki.js implementation and creating a business case for doing things such as being able to use a better search funtionality, I'm trying to find a new static site generator that will do everything the company needs, and gives a better experience than the one wiki.js has created. 

So now onto my current problem... finding the tool that can do it all.

## Tooling Research, and the Struggles it Created

So before I could start finding a tool that did what the company wanted, I needed to know the requirements. Alongside the feedback I'd gathered, I'd also asked for some requirements:

1. The wiki needs to support multi-repository documentation locations. Basically, the tool needs to be able to pull code from any defined repository, and using metadata, place it in the correct place in the wiki. 
2. The search functionality needs to support partial search results. So, I need to find a tool that is going to meet the security policy, and (as a preference) be open-source and actively supported.
3. Needs to support Markdown and MDX. This shouldn't be a problem, most tools support Markdown as it's a lightweight markup language.
4. Needs to support images in png, jpeg and svg formats. Apart from svg format, quite simple to do.
5. Needs to support the display of UML-type diagrams, including Mermaid diagrams. Thankfully UML languages are becoming quite common, so there's a lot of support for displaying these types of diagrams.
6. Preference for an in-built editor, but only if bi-directional syncing exists. Simply put, someone can modify a page in the wiki, and the source code (in the repository) will be updated. However, you cannot create new pages in the wiki, they have to be done in a repository.
7. Deployment needs to be similar to what already exists. So needs to go to AWS, and has automatic refresh when there is a change to the wiki in any way.
8. Optional. Comments and feedback available to give in the wiki. From an analytics point of view, this would be good. It would allow us to see how the wiki is being used, and by being able to give feedback on any given page, people can see and learn how useful the information is.


- Docusaurus
- MKDocs
- Gitbook
- Astro
- Gatsby
- Hugo
- 